It is not known where this tintype studio portrait of William Opie was taken.

Images includes view of brick house with windmill to right and chicken wire fence in foreground. Mr. Aberle owned the Fergus Falls Brewery.

AAD Temple Imperial Council Session at a Minneapolis gathering. The Duluth chapter of the Shriners is the Aad Temple.

Exterior view of the Aage Peterson Store in  Starbuck.

Receipt for an order for pharmaceutical items was taken on August 19, 1933 by H. F. Mark of the P. M. Mark Medicine Company of Fosston, Minnesota, for Aamoth Brothers of Mahnomen, Minnesota.

Interior view of the A. A. Zimmerman Hardware Store, Sporting Goods Department.

Interior view of the A. A. Zimmerman Hardware Store in Mankato.

Interior view of the A. A. Zimmerman Hardware Store, Paint Department.

Interior view of the A. A. Zimmerman Hardware Store in Mankato.

Abandoned brick house located at the site of the Yellow Medicine Agency. The Yellow Medicine Agency was destroyed during the Dakota Conflict of 1852, and the site is now part of Upper Sioux Agency State Park in Minnesota. This image is by Arthur Adams, Minneapolis high school teacher, local historian, and photographer. Adams traveled throughout Minnesota, taking photographs to augment his lectures. His studio was located at 3648 Lyndale Avenue South in Minneapolis.

Looking north at the abandoned streetcar right of way at the Linden Hills Bridge.

Looking north at the abandoned streetcar right of way at the Interlachen Bridge.

Looking north across 42nd Street at the abandoned streetcar right of way.

Exterior view of a large house, possibly a boarding house, boarded up and in disrepair.

Looking east at partially paved over abandoned streetcar track on East Hennepin at Stinson Blvd.

Abbett's Drug Store 201 west Superior street; streetcar tracks; people; awnings; signs; businesses up avenue; Salvation army; People's Theater

Portrait of Abbot Alexius Edelborck, Order of Saint Benedict (OSB).

Portrait of Abbot Alexius Edelborck, Order of Saint Benedict (OSB).

Portrait of Abbot Peter Engel, Order of Saint Benedict (OSB).

Map of Minneapolis with an index to additions and ward boundaries.

Interior of the A.B. Cone Jewelry Store with A.B. Cone and Jennie Bryan, clerk, behind the counter.

Abe Malmon filling up an automobile at his gas station was in downtown St. Paul near 7th and St. Peter.

Abe Orbuch was born in a small town in Poland near the Russian border. He fled Poland at 21 to avoid conscription into the Russian military, settling in St. Paul.  He bought a Model-T Ford and traveled to small towns outside of St. Paul where he sold fruit.  He formed friendships with many in the Polish community in Foley and commuted to a poultry business he owned there for over forty years.  He bought chickens, eggs and veal from Foley farmers and sold them sugar, flour and twine.

Business trade card advertising the Arctic Cracker and Spice Company on Nicollet Island, Minneapolis, Minnesota.

A bill for an act authorizing the establishment of a Worthington State College in Worthington, Minnesota.

Portrait of African-American girl holding flowers and wearing a large hat sitting on chair.

Chicago Milwaukee \u0026 Saint Paul \

Three nuns, two women, and five children posing in front of windows. One child is African-American. Two girls have their heads shaved.

Studio portrait of Dan Edding sitting on a wicker chair covered with a fur pelt.

Several children posing with two African-American women and a Catholic nun.

Civilian Conservation Corps camp workers in winter on the North Shore of Lake Superior at Grand Marais.

Theater stage hands union posed in a line outdoors on an avenue for photograph after wining strike; hats have acronym FATSE with the first letter not visible; two boys African American or in blackface assist adult holding union banner

Navel officers and crew of the vessel U.S.S.. Paducah, Dubuque Class gunboat launched 1904 and out of service 1945, in Duluth for naval reservist training.

Female student teacher helping student reading at his desk in 1971. Red marks are from cropping instructions when photo was added to a Bethel publication.

Henry Merry was appointed a Duluth mailman in March 1902 and retired in 1933. He is standing on a bricked street holding his mailbag, parcels, and mail rolled and bound with leather straps.

The view is to the southeast from the north side of Front Street (Center Avenue) just west of 4th Street North. Workers are paving Front Street; cedar blocks placed on end over a fir plank base; On the corner across the intersection stands Ole E. Flaten's Photo Gallery. On top of the pole on the corner a telephone lineman strings wire. Two unidentified young black men stand in the middle of the intersection.

World War I home front; people leaving on a train; Union Depot; African American people; segregation; soldiers; railroads

Bridge construction site with contractors and engineers.

The Saint Paul Almanac is an annual calendar and guide to take the curious urban adventurer through the year of 2015 in Minnesota's capital city. The Saint Paul Almanac brings the diverse Saint Paul community together via city-wide events and fostering individual artistic expression via the stories and poems featured in each issue.

The Saint Paul Almanac is an annual calendar and guide to take the curious urban adventurer through the year of 2017 in Minnesota's capital city. The Saint Paul Almanac brings the diverse Saint Paul community together via city-wide events and fostering individual artistic expression via the stories and poems featured in each issue.

The Saint Paul Almanac is an annual calendar and guide to take the curious urban adventurer through the year of 2016 in Minnesota's capital city. The Saint Paul Almanac brings the diverse Saint Paul community together via city-wide events and fostering individual artistic expression via the stories and poems featured in each issue.

St. Benedict's Mission, White Earth Indian Reservation (White Earth Band of Ojibwe).  The school at White Earth was so successful that it was noticed by Katherine Drexel who lived in Philadelphia and had devoted her life to working for American Indians and African Americans.  (She later founded the Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament for the education of these minorities.)  Katherine visited White Earth with her two sisters and was so impressed by the work of the Benedictines there that she made arrangements for the building of a new school that would house 150 orphaned and dependent children.  During the summer of 1890, the bricks for this four-story building were made near the mission and in the winter months, the lumber and other materials were gathered.  Two years later, February 10, 1892, the school was opened for 100 children with the expectation that government funds were available to educate and cloth them.  By 1895, the enrollment had grown to 150; the number of teachers and helpers grew to eighteen over the years. However, when government funding was rescinded by the turn of the century, the school faced the challenge of survival.  The Benedictines turned to the charity of the Catholics of the Northwest Territory, of St. John's Abbey and of St. Benedict's Convent, and most of all, to tribal funds that the government had held in trust for them in lieu of the land they had given up.  These funds could be requested by the Ojibwe as needed.  In this way, St. Benedict's Mission managed to continue the boarding school until 1945.  When the tribal funds were no longer available, the school became a parochial day school.   [SBMA, McDonald, pp. 241-246]

Large group of young girls in front of school including an African-American girl.

Circus; signs; circus posters; animals; elephants; circus employees; African Americans; entrance; people; people; children; bicycles

An African-American man speaks to a crowd gathered in front of Stewart Hall.

George Bonga, a fur-trader of African-American and Ojibwe descent. He was one of the first African-Americans born in Minnesota. This image is by Arthur Adams, Minneapolis high school teacher, local historian, and photographer. Adams traveled throughout Minnesota, taking photographs to augment his lectures. His studio was located at 3648 Lyndale Avenue South in Minneapolis.

Morgan Park; Open House; African American residents; band members in a group in background; people; bus; cars; trees; children; bike; welcome banner

Sawyer and Davis building wholesale grocers third avenue west and Superior street; barrels and boxes; driver, horses and loaded wagon; two men; African American child

The Bearmans were a North Side family with a successful produce business.  They sponsored a baseball team that played in the municipal league. Of note is the unidentified African-American player at the far left.

An African American woman places a baby upon a scale while workers look on. Other mothers holding children sit in chairs along the walls. The Emanuel Cohen Center provided recreation space and social services to the North Minneapolis Jewish community. The Center was names for Emanuel Cohen, an attorney and the Center's principle benefactor.

